# Phase 1 -- Job Status

## Goals

* Write a use case to add a job status to the database
* Write tests to confirm I can test at the use case level
* Understand how to mock the database connection

## Use cases

Job status is pretty simple. We can add them and read them. There's no update and any deletes will happen as part of a scheduled purge process.

In `domain.go` we have a data transfer object (DTO), `JobStatusDto`. It carries data into the use cases from HTTP or other sources.

## Add use case

The `Add` use case stores a new job status row in the database so the data is available for job status history and SLO performance calculation (if reporting from the database). At a basic level, it needs to:

* Ensure times are good (need for JobTs/BusDt validation to work)
* Check the data in the DTO to be sure it's usable.
* Create a `JobStatus`
* Ensure the row to be inserted isn't a duplicate.
* Insert the row in the database.

### Ensure times are good

`JobStatusTimestamp` and `BusinessDate` may arrive with too much precision. Also, life is easier if all times in the database are normalized to UTC. Reports and a future UI can convert to/from a specified time zone if needed.

* `JobStatusTimestamp`
  * Set to `JobStatusTimestamp.Truncate(time.Second).UTC()` -- truncates to 1 second accuracy and converts to UTC
* `BusinessDate`
  * `yr, mo, dy := BusinessDate.Date()` then set to `time.Date(yr, mo, dy, 0, 0, 0, 0, time.UTC)`
  * `BusinessDate` is an absolute date not affected by time zone shifts, so we can normalize to UTC this way.

Written as `normalizeTimes`, a method on the DTO in `dataObjects.go`. Because these rules are business data rules, I'm treating the DTO definition as a domain object. I may change my mind on how to handle this later, but it makes sense to me for now.

### Check data in DTO

What checks do we need to validate the DTO?

* `ApplicationId`
  * Not empty
  * Not too long
  * Is a known id (skip for now because no data)
* `JobId`
  * Not empty
  * Not too long
  * Is a known id (skip for now because no data)
  * Assumes we'll have data for all jobs we care about and won't store data for jobs we don't care about
* `JobStatusCode`
  * Is found in the array of valid statuses
  *Added `ValidJobStatusCodes`; decide if export is needed later.
* `JobStatusTimestamp`
  * Not empty
  * Not in the future
* `BusinessDate`
  * Not empty
  * Not in the future
  * Is <= the date part of `JobStatusTimestamp` (need to be sure this doesn't cause problems with Asia)
* `RunId` is not too long
* `HostId` is not too long

FUTURE: If data is invalid, return a "bad data error" (custom) to the caller for logging and return to client. (HTTP 400)

Written as `isUsable`, a method on the DTO in `dataObjects.go`. Same reasoning as `normalizeTimes`.

### Create JobStatus

The decisions above lead to some changes.

"Can I get a good `JobStatus`?" is a question for the domain, not the use case. The use case attempts to create a `JobStatus` and either gets a `JobStatus` it can use or gets an error.

So, the use case is now:

* Try to create a `JobStatus` with the DTO.
  * On error, return error
* Try to add the `JobStatus` to the database.
  * On error, return error
  * ASSUMPTION: attempting to add a duplicate row will return an error, so no need for a separate duplicate check
* Return the `JobStatus`.

Because I've moved data checks onto the DTO, I could call the DTO functions in the use case and keep the validation there. That might make sense, but I think it makes more sense from a business reasoning perspective to say, "When I try to create a `JobStatus`, I ensure the data I'm trying to use is valid." The alternative is scattering the validation in all the places we might create a `JobStatus`. For example, the repo needs to call `newJobStatus` with the raw data passed as a DTO to get a `JobStatus` to return rather than just trusting the data in the database.

### Definition of a duplicate row

We don't want to insert a row in the database where `ApplicationId`, `JobId`, `JobStatusCode`, `BusinessDate` and `JobStatusTimestamp` are the same because that can cause problems when calculating SLO performance. I could do this with a primary key constraint on the table in the database. That's probably less overhead that querying to check for a duplicate.

FUTURE: If the row already exists, return a "duplicate row error" (custom) to the caller for logging and return to client. (HTTP 409)

### Add JobStatus

Call the repo's add method.

FUTURE: Need a "database error" (custom) that the repo can return so the caller can log correctly. (HTTP 500)

**COMMIT:** FEAT: add the Add use case and reorganize code based on where it led thinking

## Testing

Investigate how to write tests and options.

I can test the domain and leave the use cases untested, but that seems questionable because the UCs carry business process logic (error recovery, error responses, alternate paths based on data state, etc.).

How might I mock or intercept calls to the database. I'd really like the repo code to be exercised too so I can confirm it returns errors correctly. An ORM could standardize errors to some extent, but I'm not sure I'm ready to go that route yet.

LATER

Based on learning about testing and looking at how to test to include the repo, I'll probably use [`testify`](https://github.com/stretchr/testify) in the future and maybe [`mockery`](https://vektra.github.io/mockery/installation/). For now, I'll keep it basic and use [`go-sqlmock`](https://github.com/DATA-DOG/go-sqlmock) to fake the database in tests.

So, let's write a test of the `Add` use case and see how this works. What can go wrong? What can go right?

* The `dto` could fail validation and return an error. (if ok continue)
* The repo `add` method could fail and return an error. (if ok continue)
* The use case returns a `JobStatus` and no error.

I'll create `useCases_test.go` and put the code in `package jobStatus_test` so it's a black box test. I'll write a `beforeEach()` function because setup for most tests will be similar. If I need to change data in the DTO, I can do it in the test function. I'll start with the `add` test case so I figure out how the database mock works.

Testing the `add` step, I'm getting an unexpected error value:

```
    useCases_test.go:54: err ExecQuery '
                                INSERT INTO "JobStatus" ("ApplicationId", "JobId", "JobStatusCode", "JobStatusTimestamp", "BusinessDate", "RunId", "HostId")
                                VALUES($1, $2, $3, $4, $5, $6, $7)
                        ', arguments do not match: argument 0 expected [int64 - 2] does not match actual [string - App1]
```

I know running against real pg inserts rows, so the insert should be okay. I must have the `ExpectExec()` wrong.

After some head vs. brick wall collisions, I need to step away for a while and come back with fresh eyes and maybe some more reading about how `sqlmock` works. Or find an alternative.

LATER

Let's ask a few questions.

* Where does the error appear in the source? -- sqlmock_go18.go, line 327 (`func exec()`)
* The function loops over expectations
  * I need to look at `attemptArgMatch` and `argsMatches`
  * It's caused by `argsMatches` in `expectations_go18.go` line 68 -- so, it's looking for an int64 value 2 -- why
  * Changing the mock in the test doesn't change the error (and the error makes no sense for the mock in the test)
  * Found it -- I was setting up the mock in `beforeEach`; that mock came first so broke everything.

Now I'm getting a non-error, but that may be because I'm `WillReturnResult()` with an error. Using `WillReturnError()` gets an error and the test passes. I can add `WithArgs` and list the DTO members. But `WithArgs` doesn't seem to fail if I pass the wrong order, so it must be checking that the args are there, regardless of order. So, for now I'll ignore `WithArgs`.

To test the DTO validation, I want to use a table driven test, but I need to change different fields of the DTO for each test. I can use `reflect` to change values in the DTO with a string name reference. I'll set up tests for each failure (too short, too long, etc.).

Because I'm testing for errors, I wonder if I can set up a generic error and customize the message. For now, I'm testing that the error message contains a value that I expect.

I have tests for all DTO string values. Next I need tests for DTO time values (JobTs < now, BusDt <= today) and the success case.

**COMMIT:** TEST: add unit tests for jobStatusUC.Add()
