# Phase 1 -- Job Status -- Logs and Errors

## Goals

* Understand how to log in Golang
* Understand how to structured log in Golang
  * I think 1.21's slog could be okay, but it won't be available for a while, so look at zerolog or logrus.

Because errors get logged and need to carry useful information for logging, so logging choices affect how I approach errors.

* Identify errors for repo, use case, data objects, etc.
* Decide basic error structure and how to build errors.
* Build errors and start returning them and handling them; update tests.
* Update controller to handle and log errors (use console for now).
* Update handler to respond based on errors from the controller.

## What errors do we need?

Use cases should return errors they receive up the chain without changing them unless there's a compelling need.

* InvalidDataError -- from data checking methods when data does not pass rules (DTO validator, etc.)
  * `newJobStatus` should return this based on `isUsable()` result
* RepoError -- when data access doesn't work as expected; these errors make driver specific errors consistent so non-repo code doesn't change
  * NotFoundError -- query expected to return results returned no results; makes it semantically obvious and consistent in code vs. checking for empty result
  * DatabaseError -- database driver/ORM failed
  * In `dbToDomain()`, `Scan()` may return an error; understand what we can get from this and how to handle it
  * In `dbToDomain()`, `newJobStatus()` may return InvalidDataError; consider how to handle reporting
* ControllerError -- specific to the controller and mainly for logging; may not exist as separate errors
  * JsonError -- error decoding JSON; can we get encode errors?
  * Errors from use cases drive setting response status in the controller
* InfrastructureError -- external code or server startup errors
  * Environment data is incomplete or unusable
  * A third party library/SDK failed

I think tackle them in this order. Build InvalidDataError first and get it flowing and causing responses in the controller to see the pattern. Log (to console).

**NOTE:** Unless there's a compelling reason to do otherwise, logging happens in the:

* Handler -- request/response, authN/authZ errors, and other data that may never make it to the controller
* Controller -- use case results/errors

## What should an error look like?

I will use structured (JSON) logging, so I need a way to build a JSON error message.

When something fails, I want to know:

* Where did it fail (file, function)?
  * `runtime.Caller(0)` returns the pc, filename, line number, and an "is it ok" indicator for the line where it's called.
  * `path/filepath` has a `Base()` method that gets the final node of the path.
  * `runtime.FuncForPC(pc).Name()` returns a function name like "main.MyType.TestCaller".
  * While line seems valuable, it may be less so if there's a delay between changes and code deploying to production.
* What details do we have?
  * Error message
  * Error code -- this is valuable because it's consistent where message may vary
* What data was it operating on?
  * This value varies. For `GetById()`, the value is the id, for `add()`, its the data object passed.
* Is it a hard failure? Or can it be retried?
* Can we get a stack trace?
  * `runtime/debug` has a `Stack()` method that returns a stack trace as a `[]byte`, just `string(debug.Stack())` to get something printable.
  * TBD if this is really valuable; maybe put it behind a debug log level

Let's start with something like:

```golang
type BaseError struct {
   FileName string
   FunctionName string
   LineNumber int
   Message string
   Code string
   ErrorData any
   CanRetry bool
}

func (be BaseError) Error() string {
   return fmt.Sprintf("FileName %s | FunctionName %s | Message %s", be.FileName, be.FunctionName, be.Message)
}

type InvalidDataError BaseError // will not inherit Error method, so need to duplicate
type NotFoundError BaseError
// etc.

// Use it
newErr := InvalidDataError{
   FileName: ,
   FunctionName: ,
   // etc
}
```

I can write a function to initialize a `BaseError` and use it with casting to create other errors.

```golang

func NewBaseError(params...) BaseError {
   return BaseError{
      // setup based on params and methods
   }
}

nfe := NotFoundError(NewBaseError(params...))
```

This approach doesn't work with `errors.Is()`. I suspect it's also not very Gopheric, but I'm not sure it makes sense to duplicate structures all over the place.

Another option is to add `ErrorType string` to `BaseError` and a set of defined type values.

I'll need to think about this.

## Logging

I did some logging experiments in my [go-core](https://github.com/jmjf/go-core) repo. (This is a practice repo, not a best practices repo. It's about quick tests to help me understand or try different options to get a feel for them, not ideal approaches.) Based on that, I've decided to go with `slog` for now. My more performant alternative will be `zap`.

When I write `slog` lines, I'll use the `slog.<type>(<key>, <value>)` methods. I'm doing this to help avoid writing a value with a missing key or a key with a missing value. If I move to `zap`, I'll use the plain logger (no sugar) and the syntax will be similar. (More similar than `zerolog`'s syntax.)

## Which brings me back to errors

What is the basic problem?

My coding patterns have four layers. From inside to outside they are:

* Domain -- data structures and fundamental rules about them; data quality checks, getters/setters where get/set needs guarantees (transform, validate, etc.), data-level operations (create a new in-memory instance) and noting events they fire
* Application -- business processes, ensuring the execute successfully and handling failures; uses domain objects for data, calls adapters to persist data
* Adapters -- insulate the application from the infrastructure; ensure that infrastructure changes do not become domain or application changes
* Infrastructure -- third party code or services; may change due to third party changes or because the team decides to use a different third party

Logging is third party. I don't write the logger code. Today, `log/slog` is adequate. A year from now, transaction volume is up and I need a capability or performance `log/slog` doesn't provide. Changing my logger should not require changing my application or domain code (avoid unintended business logic changes; touches more code; more patterns require change -> more complex). My options are to create a logging adapter that deals with arbitrary sets of log data (costs performance and maintenance overhead) or keep all logging in the adapter layer.

Keeping logging in the input adapters usually makes the most sense, but requires a way to communicate error details from other parts of the code. I could use Go's native "string" errors, but parsing data out of strings reliably gets complex, especially if they're nested (application gets domain error, needs to identify where in the application layer it happened but pass domain error data too). So, I need a way to return error `struct`s and have Go recognize them as errors.

After some digging and reading, I found a couple of helpful posts.

[Go by Example: Errors](https://gobyexample.com/errors) -- some (not current) patterns that hint at how to return errors
[How to add extra information to errors in Go](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-add-extra-information-to-errors-in-go)

Where I end up is:

* Define base `DomainError`, `ApplicationError`, and other errors as needed to communicate error details.
* Ensure the errors comply with the Go `error` interface (have an `Error()` function).
* Ensure the errors have an `Unwrap()` method so we can use `Is()` and `As()`

Assume a domain object gets an error:

* Create a `DomainError` with the details.
* In the application layer, return the domain error lightly wrapped (`fmt.Errorf("fileOrObject.functionName: %w", err)`)
* When logging the error, use `Is()` and `As()` as needed to unwrap.

If the application layer gets an error from a repo (`RepoError`) or other adapter it calls, it would lightly wrap it before returning it. If the application layer detects an error itself, it would return an `ApplicationError`. This strategy ensures that the error will only match one of the custom error types to avoid confusion or multi-layer unwrapping.

This means adapters are responsible for extract and wrapping any custom error structure the library they adapt provides. So, imagine a database library returned an error structure that included database-specific details. The repo would need to get that structure (`As()`) and pull out the values it needs to return.

To see this approach in action, here's code adapted from the DigitalOcean post.

```golang
package main

import (
 "errors"
 "fmt"
)

// primitive errors
var (
 errUhOh     = errors.New("uh oh") // or, this could be "PropsError" which leads to a 400 Bad Request response; similar for next
 errThatsOdd = errors.New("that's odd")
)

// DomainError is the custom error type
type DomainError struct {
 Value int
 Err   error
}

// Use a "new" (constructor) for DomainError to ensure we create it correctly everywhere
func newDomainError(value int, err error) *DomainError {
 return &DomainError{
  Value: value,
  Err:   err,
 }
}

// Make DomainError conform to the errors interface so is an error
func (ve *DomainError) Error() string {
 return fmt.Sprintf("value error: %s", ve.Err)
}

// Unwrap gets the structured data
func (ve *DomainError) Unwrap() error {
 return ve.Err
}

// DOMAIN LAYER

// validateValue simulates a data quality check in the domain layer
func validateValue(number int) error {
 if number == 1 {
  // always use named errors to ensure reliable detection
  return newDomainError(number, errThatsOdd)

  // return fmt.Errorf("domain.validateValue: %w", newDomainError(number, errThatsOdd))
  // output first line: validating 1... err application.runValidation: domain.validateValue: value error: that's odd

 } else if number == 2 {
  return newDomainError(number, errUhOh)
 }
 return nil
}

// APPLICATION LAYER

// runValidation calls validateValue, simulating the application layer
func runValidation(number int) error {
 err := validateValue(number)
 if err != nil {
  // domain errors in the application layer are lightly wrapped
  return fmt.Errorf("application.runValidation: %w", err)
 }
 // If the application layer includes process logic that could recognize an error,
 // (example: an invalid state transition), it could send an ApplicationError.
 // The ApplicationError would not be wrapped (would be error from newApplicationError()).
 return nil
}

// INBOUND ADAPTER LAYER

func main() {
 for num := 1; num <= 3; num++ {
  fmt.Printf("validating %d... ", num)

  err := runValidation(num)
  if err != nil {
   fmt.Println("err", err)
  }

  var domainErr *DomainError
  // More likely, we'd detect the type of error (domain, application, etc.)
  // and handle based on type. But, we can detect specific errors (errUhOh)
  // if we have special handling for them.
  if errors.Is(err, errUhOh) {
   fmt.Print("oh no!") 
   // will be a DomainError, so we could get it's value here
   if errors.As(err, &domainErr) {
    fmt.Printf(" -- DomainError %d, %v", domainErr.Value, domainErr.Err)
   }
   fmt.Println()
  } else if errors.As(err, &domainErr) {
   fmt.Printf("value error (%d): %v\n", domainErr.Value, domainErr.Err)
  } else if err != nil {
   fmt.Println("there was an error:", err)
  } else {
   fmt.Println("valid!")
  }
 }
}


/** OUTPUT
validating 1... err application.runValidation: value error: that's odd
value error (1): that's odd
validating 2... err application.runValidation: value error: uh oh
oh no! -- DomainError 2, uh oh
validating 3... valid!
**/
```

Note that if `validateValue` uses the alternate return for `that's odd`, we get a simplified stack trace that's probably adequate for figuring out where it failed and how it got there.

Using this strategy, I think I'll have:

* Primitive errors like `PropsError` (domain = invalid data), `StatusError` (application = invalid state transition), `NotFoundError`, `DatabaseError`, `<ExternalService>Error`, etc. (adapter)
* Layer-specific errors like `DomainError`, `ApplicationError`, `RepoError`, `ControllerError`, etc.
* Some primitive errors may be creator functions. For example `newApiVersionError` might be a function that takes the invalid API version and returns `fmt.Errorf("invalid API version: %s", apiVersion)`. Alternatively, the `ControllerError` might carry the whole request body and make that unnecessary. (This example isn't a good one because the error would be detected in an inbound adapter, so wouldn't need a custom error, could just log and return a 400 Bad Request or similar error.)

**COMMIT:** DOCS: figure out error strategy; choose a logger
