# Phase 1 -- Job Status -- HTTP server

## Goals

* Write an HTTP server that receives a POST and adds the job status to the database.
* Figure out how to write a controller to call the use case in response to HTTP.
  * Which responsibilities go where?
* Write unit tests that inject a simulated HTTP call and check the response.
  * These tests care about the higher level errors -- bad data, already exists, database error -- and success
  * Use case tests to verify all the possible causes of failure the business logic (DTO validation for example) might detect.

This work may prompt a side track to define custom error types to make higher level errors clearer.

## Defining responsibilities

The basic flow is:

* HTTP server calls an HTTP handler based on route
* HTTP handler
  * If request is authorized, call controller with request/response
  * ELSE log error and respond with 403 Forbidden
* Controller
  * If using in-message API versioning, confirms it knows the version (return error if not known)
  * Converts request to a DTO
  * Calls use case with the DTO and gets the result (controller is created with use case)
  * If result is okay
    * Controller builds the response body
    * Log action (because we probably want this to be a short log with just an id and "where" info, not the full body)
    * Controller sets response status (OK, Accepted, etc.)
    * Controller returns response body
  * If the result is an error
    * Controller logs the error (business error)
    * Controller sets the response status based on the business error type (bad data -> 400, database error -> 500, etc.)
    * Controller returns error
* HTTP handler
  * Receives result from controller
  * If result is an error, build simplify result (status code and short message) to avoid leaking info
  * Send response

I'm ignoring API versioning for now. It won't be hard to add later (based on past experience).

Normally, I keep the HTTP handler separate from the controller because details about URL structure and dispatch are concerns of the handler, not the controller. But, I may decide to add that to the controller or as a separate structure beside the controller (TBD based on some research into how others deal with these issues).

## Build controller

The controller is a type of adapter, like repos. For now, I'll put the controller in `serveHttpControllers.go` and write using the built in `ServeHttp`. If I switch to a different HTTP framework, I'll have `GinControllers.go` or similar, just like repos have `memoryRepo` and `dbSqlPgRepo` and possibly `gormRepo`.

I may want an abstract controller that includes helper functions to set response codes so the controller implementation doesn't need to worry about how different frameworks handle response setup, but I'll pull that out later if it makes sense.

The starting point is

* `JobStatusController` -- a struct that has the use case
* `NewJobStatusController` -- creates a controller
* `AddJobStatus` -- method on `JobStatusController` that does the basics of what a controller needs to do

For now, the controller is setting error values directly. Use case failures always respond 500 Internal Server Error.

For now, I'll put the server's `main.go` in `cmd/httpServer` so I can do some simple testing. I'll decide how to organize different deployable services later. I need to add `pgx` to this module.

The server is running and curl suggests it's alive. Let's fire up Insomnia and try it.

POST with JSON below returns a bad request. I suspect it isn't happy parsing the times.

```json
{
 "applicationId": "HTTP 1",
 "jobId": "HTTP job 1",
 "jobStatusCode": "start",
 "jobStatusTimestamp": "2023-06-10T18:19:20Z",
 "businessDate": "2023-06-08",
 "runId": "HTTP run 1",
 "hostId": "HTTP host a"
}
```

I added a `fmt.Println` and confirmed that the problem seems to be the `BusinessDate` as a bare date is failing parse. I'll need a custom marshal and unmarshal methods. [Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/45303326/how-to-parse-non-standard-time-format-from-json); [GoDocs Unmarshaler](https://pkg.go.dev/encoding/json#Unmarshaler); [GoDocs Marshaller](https://pkg.go.dev/encoding/json#Marshaler)

The following code snip works in the playground and shows how to convert from and to a date only string:

```golang
 s := "2023-06-10"
 tm, _ := time.Parse(time.DateOnly, s)
 fmt.Println(tm, " | ", tm.Format(time.DateOnly))
```

For now, I'll pass "midnight" time. And that gets me a 200 OK with the following response.

```json
{
 "ApplicationId": "HTTP 1",
 "JobId": "HTTP job 1",
 "JobStatusCode": "START",
 "JobStatusTimestamp": "2023-06-10T18:19:20Z",
 "BusinessDate": "2023-06-08T00:00:00Z",
 "RunId": "HTTP run 1",
 "HostId": "HTTP host a"
}
```

And I can see that row landed in the database. Let's test normalizing `JobStatusTimestamp` by passing a non-Z time. Note how Go expects to see the time zone offset.

* `"jobStatusTimestamp": "2023-06-10T18:19:20-05:00"` -> `"JobStatusTimestamp": "2023-06-10T10:19:20Z"`
* `"jobStatusTimestamp": "2023-06-10T18:19:20+08:00"` -> `"JobStatusTimestamp": "2023-06-10T23:19:20Z"`
* `"jobStatusTimestamp": "2023-06-10T05:19:20+08:00"` -> `"JobStatusTimestamp": "2023-06-09T21:19:20Z"`

Looks like it's working.

**COMMIT:** FEAT: add controller; add simple HTTP server to see it work

## Improve BusinessDate handling

Let's define a Date type that will be a time that includes JSON methods and a method that returns the date part of the string using the DateOnly format.

I used several references and developed the code in the playground. I'm putting it in `common/date.go` for now, but will probably move it later. Unit tests written and passing based on work in the playground.

Now apply it and fix tests to work with it. Main change of note is that `dbSqlPgRepo` needs `time.Time` in the database, so I need to ensure `Date` is converted everywhere. This is less of an issue with `memoryRepo`. Added `NewDateFromTime` to converts a `time.Time` to a `Date`.

Use case tests are passing. Date tests are passing.

Running the HTTP server and sending a date-only `businessDate` returns 500. Add some logging to the controller. That shows it's a duplicate key error. Change the `jobStatusTimestamp` and it works as expected. The only off thing I see is that the returned data uses uppercase field names.

Because it's encoding a `JobStatus`, not a DTO. Adding `json:"field"` tags fixed it.

**COMMIT:** FEAT: add Date type that handles date-only time

## Next steps

* Build out errors so I can handle them properly in the controller.
  * BadData, DatabaseError, possibly one or two others
  * Can I build a BaseError and have alias types so `error.Is` works? If so, will `error.As` work?
* Decide on handler strategy: on the controller, separate but with the controller, somewhere else, abstract controller, etc.
  * Handler name, signature, etc., vary by framework so not part of the controller.
* Decide on server bootstrap strategy: needs repo, uc, ctrl; server vs. app vs. router concept; testing considerations.
* Test how server time zone affects `BusinessDate`.
