# Interlude -- Analyze what Ben Johnson is doing with his server, http, and main; make plans

## Goals

I want to understand what Ben Johnson is doing with the main, server, routes, etc., in [this repo](https://github.com/benbjohnson/wtf/tree/main). I feel like I like it, but I need to take it apart and understand it so I can decide what ideas I want to use from it.

After I understand, I'll build content in `internal/jobStatus/http` and `internal/jobStatus/cmd`.

Finally, I think I'll move everything in the `internal/jobStatus/db` directory up one level and ensure everything begins with a `db` prefix to remove a dead level of the directory tree.

## Repo overview

The repo is a simple application that's similar to `jobStatus` in my structure. Johnson puts the server, route handlers, etc., in `http`. My current notes on that directory and it's contents are:

```
  | | |-http
  | | | |-http.go       (config, sessioning)
  | | | |-jobStatus.go  (routes, route handlers and infra glue code)
  | | | |-server.go     (middleware, router assembly, ServeHTTP or equiv., general routes/handlers (health, 404, auth endpoints, etc.))
```

## cmd/main.go

He has a `Main` object. I believe it exists to support e2e tests written at this level.

```golang
type Main struct {
 // Configuration path and parsed config data.
 Config     Config
 ConfigPath string

 // SQLite database used by SQLite service implementations.
 DB *sqlite.DB  // from wtf/sqlite/sqlite.go -- db connection, context, etc.

 // HTTP server for handling HTTP communication.
 // SQLite services are attached to it before running.
 HTTPServer *http.Server // from wtf/http/*, not net/http

 // Services exposed for end-to-end tests.
 UserService wtf.UserService  // interface from wtf/user.go
}

type Config struct {
 DB struct {
  DSN string `toml:"dsn"`
 } `toml:"db"`

 HTTP struct {
  Addr     string `toml:"addr"`
  Domain   string `toml:"domain"`
  HashKey  string `toml:"hash-key"`
  BlockKey string `toml:"block-key"`
 } `toml:"http"`

 GoogleAnalytics struct {
  MeasurementID string `toml:"measurement-id"`
 } `toml:"google-analytics"`

 GitHub struct {
  ClientID     string `toml:"client-id"`
  ClientSecret string `toml:"client-secret"`
 } `toml:"github"`

 Rollbar struct {
  Token string `toml:"token"`
 } `toml:"rollbar"`
}
```

`main()`:

* Inject version information in the build and picks them up at the start of `main()`.
* Set up a `context.WithCancel` and a channel to watch for `SIGINT` (`os.Interrupt` signal); cancel the context when the signal arrives (goroutine).
* Get a new `Main` object. (`NewMain()`)
  * `Main` represents the program and holds global data.
* Read command line parameters and act on them
* Call `Run(ctx)` on `Main`
* Wait for the context to be canceled
* Clean up

`NewMain()`:

* `Config` -> `DefaultConfig()` -- sets `config.DB.DSN`
* `ConfigPath` -> `DefaultConfigPath` (variable, `~/wtf.conf`)
* `DB` -> `sqlite.NewDB("")` -> `sqlite.DB` with DSN set to "", `Now`, `EventService`, `ctx` and `cancel` from a new cancel context
* `HTTPServer` -> `http.NewServer()` -> see `http/server.go` below.

`Run(ctx)`:

* Set up logging, analytics, and similar services
* Create an `EventService` (`inmem.NewEventService()`) and set `Main.DB.EventService`
* Set `Main.DB.DSN` and connect to the database
* Create an `AuthService`, `DialService`, etc., using `sqlite.New*Service(Main.DB)`
  * In my terms, these are repos because they query the database and return results; no business logic
* Set `Main.UserService` to the new `UserService` (from prev)
  * Exists for e2e tests, not used in `wtfd`
* Set `Main.HTTPServer` configuration data (address, domain, etc.)
* Set `Main.HTTPServer.*Service` to services created earlier
  * **IMPORTANT** because it determines which services `HTTPServer` will use
* Start the server (`m.HTTPServer.Open()`); enable TLS if needed; start listening (goroutine)

The rest of `main.go` is helper functions for config, command line option parsing, etc.

## http/server.go

```golang
type Server struct {
 ln     net.Listener  // from stdlib net
 server *http.Server  // from stdlib net/http
 router *mux.Router   // Gorilla mux
 sc     *securecookie.SecureCookie    // Gorilla securecookie

 // Bind address & domain for the server's listener.
 // If domain is specified, server is run on TLS using acme/autocert.
 Addr   string
 Domain string

 // Keys used for secure cookie encryption.
 HashKey  string
 BlockKey string

 // GitHub OAuth settings.
 GitHubClientID     string
 GitHubClientSecret string

 // Services used by the various HTTP routes. -- interfaces in wtf/auth.go, wtf/dial.go, etc.
 AuthService           wtf.AuthService
 DialService           wtf.DialService
 DialMembershipService wtf.DialMembershipService
 EventService          wtf.EventService
 UserService           wtf.UserService
}
```

`NewServer()` -- called to set `Main.HTTPServer`; configured in `Main.Run()`

* Create a `Server` instance (`net/http` `http.Server` and router/mux)
* Add middleware: `reportPanic` in `server.go`
* Add handler for Not Found
* Add handler for `/assets/`, which serves pages from `http/assets`
* Add handler for `/debug` routes
  * `handleVersion` in `server.go`, returns `wtf.Version`
  * `handleCommit` in `server.go`, returns `wtf.Commit`
* Set main router for `/`
* Add middleware `authenticate` (attached to `Server`), `loadFlash`, `trackMetrics`, all in `server.go`
  * `trackMetrics` is interesting and probably more generally useful
  * `authenticate` is a simple auth, but has some useful ideas (handles tokens or cookies)
* Register routes (authed and unauthed)
  * `register*` functions are in `http/auth.go`, `http/dial.go`, `http/dial_membership.go`, `http/event.go`
  * They just add handlers to the router/mux

## http/dial.go

I'm using `http/dial.go` as an example because it includes an alternative `DialService` (vs. the SQLite version).

`registerDialRoutes()` -- adds handlers to the router/mux -- called in `NewServer()`

`handle*` -- handler for a route -- I'll use `handleDialCreate()` as an example of what a handler does

* Decode the body from the request (JSON or form value)
* Call `Server.DialService.CreateDial()`
  * **IMPORTANT** In the running program, `Server.DialService` is from `sqlite/dial.go` -- calls `createDial`, which has all the business logic
* Set up response (JSON or HTML)
* Reply with a redirect (`http.Redirect()`) to the new dial's page

There's also a local `DialService` used for testing. It has a `Client` (from `http/http.go`), which is just a URL (`string`). The service implements the `DialService` interface, but instead of calling the database, it makes an HTTP request to the same route. Using the local `DialService.CreateDial` as an example.

* It accepts a context and a `*wtf.Dial`
* Convert the `wtf.Dial` to JSON
* Call `DialService.Client.newRequest()` for a POST to `/dials`
  * `newRequest()` sets up an HTTP request to the `Client.URL` with the added URL part passed.
* Call `http.DefaultClient.Do()` with the request
  * `Do()` performs the HTTP request against the client (in this case, the default client from `net/http`)
* Decode the returned JSON into the `wtf.Dial`

The only place that uses the local `DialService` is `http/dial_test.go`, which only tests `FindDials`. I'm not sure why the local `DialService` has more than stubs for the other functions. I'm not sure how the HTTP calls aren't creating a circular situation. I'm also thinking the code should be in a test module, not the `http` module.

For now, I'm assuming the local `DialService` isn't important because it isn't used in production and the other services in `wtf/http` don't have a local version of their service. Maybe this is left over code that should have been removed.

## Things I see that are interesting

* `Main` object to support e2e tests
  * I'll wait on this because I need to think about e2e before I build it
* `context.WithCancel()` from `main()` to enable controlled shutdown
* `DB` struct that carries the connection, context, DSN and some supporting pieces. It comes from `sqlite/sqlite.go`
  * I have this, but it's named for specific repo implementations (`dbSqlPgxRepo`, `gormRepo`, etc.)
  * Can I use a common name?
  * Can I not care about the type of db except at the top (`main()`)?
* `HTTPServer` struct from `http/server.go`
  * This is like kind of like `app` in Node/Express work I've done.
  * It lets me isolate the HTTP server from the router so I can test routing (if I can inject mock HTTP calls).
* Use of context to handle cleanup and close
  * I should emulate this so I can ensure everything shuts down cleanly.
* `UserService`, `DialService`, etc., in `wtf/sqlite` are like a repo; business logic related to handlers
  * I'll keep my business logic and handlers separate.
  * I'll assume I can keep my controllers separate too and possibly use the same controller for non-HTTP (TBD).
  * If I can't reuse, I may make handlers take on controller responsibility too.
* `HTTPServer` services are what get called to do actual work (may be SQLite or may be mocked)

## Comparison to Express (Node.js, TypeScript)

I have some experience with Express in Node.js using TypeScript, so I'll compare what `wtf` is doing with that to confirm what I think I'm seeing.

In Node/Express, I have:

* `server.ts`
  * Create logger
  * Get `appState` (object built from env file or actual env) and ensure is has all the values the server expects
  * Set up the database connection
  * Set up an `AbortController` to notify on shutdown (similar to `context.WithCancel`).
  * Create circuit breakers (several needed, monitor `AbortController` to shutdown retry timers).
  * Create dependencies for zpages health and readiness checks (similar to `/debug/` routes).
  * `app = buildApp(logger, databaseConnection, circuitBreakers, zpageDependencies, AbortController)` (syntax is a little different, but this is the intent)
    * `app` is the router/mux (middleware and routes)
    * But in Express, `app` also has a `listen()` that returns a server; in Go, it should be bound to an HTTP server
  * `server = app.listen(...)` to start the server'; in Go, `http.ListenAndServe()`
  * Set up events on `server` to detect `SIGINT` or Windows equivalent; will send a signal on `AbortController`

* `buildApp`
  * Create a router (base router/mux)
  * Add middleware (body parsing error handler, metrics for zpages, request id for tracing, request/response logging, authN/authZ)
  * Add routes for each module (in go-slo, would be `/api/job-status`, `/api/slo-performance`, `/api/slo`, etc.)
    * Routes are actually routers (sub-router/mux) that merge into the master router
    * `getXRouter`, where X is the module/route; from the `/<module>/infrastructure` path (`jobStatus/infrastructure`)
    * `getXRouter` initializes dependencies (`initXModule`), creates a router, assigns routes and handlers to the router, and returns the router
      * Each route calls a controller
    * `initXModule` (in the same directory) creates repos, use cases and controllers and returns them

Comparison

| Action | Node/Express file | Node/Express notes | `wtf` file | `wtf` notes |
| ------ | ----------------- | ------------------ | -------- | --------- |
| Create logger | `server.ts` | inline in `buildServer()` (equivalent to `main()`) | n/a | uses bare stdlib `log` |
| Get configuration | `appState.ts` | runs on import to `server.ts` at execution start | `cmd/wtfd/main.go` | `main()` calls `ParseFlags()` calls `ReadConfig()`; `NewMain()` sets `Config: DefaultConfig` |
| Set up database connection | `server.ts` | inline in `buildServer()` | `cmd/wtfd/main.go` | `NewMain()` sets `DB: sqlite.NewDB()`; `Run()` calls `DB.Open()` to connect |
| Set up shutdown notifier | `server.ts` | inline in `buildServer()`, creates `AbortController` | `cmd/wtfd/main.go` | `main()` as `context.WithCancel` |
| Create circuit breakers (shared app-wide) | `server.ts` | calls `buildCircuitBreakers()` | n/a | wtf has no circuit breakers |
| Set up zpage dependencies (monitor app-wide circuit breakers) | `server.ts` | inline in `buildServer()`, just a structure with references | `cmd/wtfd/main.go` | closest analogy is `main()` sets version/commit for debug routes |
| Create router/mux | `app.ts` | inline in `buildApp()`, `app = express()` | `http/server.go` | inline `NewServer()`, sets `router: mux.NewRouter()` (Gorilla mux) |
| Add middleware to router/mux | `app.ts` | inline in `buildApp()`, several `app.use()` calls | `http/server.go` | inline `NewServer()`, several `router.Use()` calls |
| Add routes to router/mux | `app.ts` | inline calls `getXRouter()` for different modules (X); `getXRouter()` returns a subrouter | `https/server.go` | inline `NewServer()`, several `router.HandleFunc()` calls, `registerXRoutes()` calls |
| Create repos, use cases, controllers | `<module>/infrastructure/initXModule<ORM>.ts` (X = module) | `initXModule()`, called by `getXRouter()` | `cmd/wtfd/main.go` | inline in `Run()`, several `sqlite.NewXService()` calls |
| Define routes and route handlers | `<module>/infrastructure/expressRoutes<ORM>.ts` (X = module) | `router = Router()` and inline adds handlers for methods/routes | `https/X.go`, where X is dial, event, auth | inline in `registerXRoutes`, `router.HandleFunc()` calls |
| Create the server | `server.ts` | inline, `server = app.listen()`, returns a server | `cmd/wtfd/main.go` | `NewMain()` sets `HTTPServer: http.NewServer()`, (`wtf/http`) |
| Start the server | `server.ts` | inline, `server = app.listen()` | `cmd/wtfd/main.go` | inline in `Run()`, calls `http.ListenAndServe()` variants |
| Notify shutdown on SIGINT/similar | `server.ts` | events on `server` signal `AbortController` | `cmd/wtfd/main.go` | inline in `main()`, `go func() { <-c; cancel() }()` and `<-ctx.Done()` |

Summarizing:

* `cmd/wtfd/main.go` is similar to Node/Express `server.ts`; handles the global setup pieces
  * `wtf` creates its equivalent of repos, use cases, and controllers in `Main.Run()` because it's more monolithic than my Node/Express case
* `http/server.go` is similar to Node/Express `app.ts`; handles app-wide router setup and bringing in routes for each module
* `https/dial.go` is similar to Node/Express `<module>/infrastructure/expressRoutes<ORM>.ts`
  * `dial.go` doesn't set up repos, so doesn't need to know which ORM it's using.
  * I'm experimenting with different database interfaces (`database/sql`, `gorm`, `sqlx`) and I expect routers (`net/http`, `gin`, possibly others), so will keep router and ORM tags for now.

I'll try the following.

* `jobStatus/cmd/<variant>/main.go` (`<variant>` is ORM and router/mux specific)
  * Get configuration (future)
  * Create logger
  * Create shutdown notifier (future)
  * Set up database connection
    * ??? Put actual connection in repo; make interface generic so I can just change imports
  * Create app-wide circuit breakers (future)
  * Create app-wide zpages (future)
  * ??? `initXModule()` to pass required components to server init
  * Create server (requires `http/server.go`)
  * Start server
  * Notify shutdown

* `http/server.go`
  * Create main router/mux
  * Add middleware
  * Add routes (requires `http/routes.go` and `init.go` or similar)
    * I may combine different sets of routes in different `main`s, so want to let routes control their requirements
    * If I find different sets of routes with common requirements, I'll sort it out then
    * Where do I need to specify ORM and router/mux?

On the last question, the only reason my Node/Express code needs ORM-specific `getXRouter()` is because it calls an ORM specific `initXModule()` and must receive and pass to `initXModule()` an ORM-specific connection/context object. The router only cares about controllers, so I could move the `initXModule()` call up the stack.

If I call `initXModule()` in `server.go`, then `server.go` is ORM specific and `getXRouter()` only cares about router/mux differences, so I could remove ORM from the latter. If I call `initXModule()` in `main.go`, I may be able to make `server.go` ORM agnostic (possible challenge: if authZ requires database access, it will need a repo, but I should be able to use an interface to hide ORM specifics).

If controllers end up being router/mux specific (different call parameters), I may need different controllers per router/mux, so will need to understand if I can make them generic in `server.go` or `main.go`.

**COMMIT:** DOCS: understand `wtf` structure; plan how I want to do it
